CHAPTER X. NOTHING IN LIFE IS HUMDRUM.
Art is a great thing, but it is not the greatest. The most important of all
perceptions is the continual perception of cause and effect. In other words, the
perception of the continuous development of the universe. In still other words,
the perception of the course of evolution. When one has thoroughly got
imbued into one's head the leading truth that nothing happens without a cause, one
grows not only large-minded, but large-hearted. It is hard to have one's
watch stolen, but one reflects that the thief of the watch became a thief from
causes of heredity and environment, which are as interesting as they are
scientifically comprehensible. And one buys another watch, if not with joy, at
any rate with a philosophy that makes bitterness impossible. One loses in the
air which so many people have of being always shocked and pained by the
curiousness of life. Such people live amid human nature as if human nature
were a foreign country full of awful foreign customs. But having reached
maturity, one ought surely to be ashamed of being a stranger in a strange
land. The study of cause and effect, while it lessens the painfulness of
life, adds to life's picturesqueness. The man to whom evolution is but a name
looks at the sea as a grandiose monotonous spectacle, which he can witness
in August for Three Schilling's third-class return. The man who is imbued
with the idea of development, of continuous cause and effect, perceives in
the sea an element which in the day before yesterday of geology was vapor,
which yesterday was boiling and which tomorrow will inevitably be ice. He
perceives that a liquid is merely something on its way to be solid, and he
is penetrated by a sense of the tremendous changeful picturesqueness of
life. Nothing will afford a more durable satisfaction than the constantly
cultivated appreciation of this. This is the end of all science. Cause and effect
are to be found everywhere. Rents went up in Shepherd's Bush. It was painful and
shocking that rents should go up in Shepherd's Bush, but to a certain point
we are all scientific students of cause and effect, and there was not a clerk
lunching at a lion's restaurant who did not scientifically put two and two
together and see in the once too penny tube the cause of an excessive demand
for wigwams in Shepherd's Bush, and in the excessive demand for wigwams the
cause of the increase in the price of wigwams. Simple, you say disdainfully.
Everything, the whole complex movement of the universe, is as simple as that when
you can sufficiently put two and two together, and my dear sir, perhaps you
happen to be an estate agent's clerk and you hate the arts and you want to foster
your immortal soul and you can't be interested in your business because it's
so humdrum. Nothing is humdrum. The tremendous changeful picturesqueness of
life is marvelously shown in an estate agent's office. What? There was a block
of traffic in Oxford Street. To avoid the block people actually began to travel
under the cellars and drains, and the result was a rise of rents in Shepherd's
Bush. And you say that isn't picturesque? Suppose you were to study, in this
spirit, the property question in London for an hour and a half every other
evening. Would it not give zest to your business and transform your whole
life? You would arrive at more difficult problems, and you would be able to
tell us why, as the natural result of cause and effect, the longest straight
street in London is about a yard and a half in length, while the longest
absolutely straight street in Paris extends for miles. I think you will admit
that in an estate agent's clerk I have not chosen an example that especially
favors my theories. You are a bank clerk, and you have not read that
breathless romance disguised as a scientific study, Walter Beghot's
Lombard Street? Ah, my dear sir, if you had begun with that and followed it up
for 90 minutes every other evening, how enthralling your business would be to
you, and how much more clearly you would understand human nature. You are penned
in town, but you love excursions in the country and the observation of
wildlife, certainly a heart-enlarging diversion. Why don't you walk out of
your house door, in your slippers, to the nearest gas-lamp of a night with
a butterfly net, and observe the wildlife of common and rare moths that
is beating about it, and coordinate the knowledge thus obtained, and build
a superstructure on it, and at last get to know something about something?
You need not be devoted to the arts, not to literature, in order to live fully.
The whole field of daily habit and seeing is waiting to satisfy that
curiosity which means life, and the satisfaction of which means an
understanding heart. I promised to deal with your case, O man who hates art and
literature, and I have dealt with it. I now come to the case of the person
happily very common, who does like reading. End of chapter.